I
People were telling one another that a newcomer had been seen on the
promenade — a lady with a dog. Dmitri Dmitrich Gurov had been a fort-
night in Yalta, and was accustomed to its ways, and he, too, had begun to
take an interest in fresh arrivals. From his seat in Vernet’s outdoor café,
he caught sight of a young woman in a toque, passing along the prome-
nade; she was fair and not very tall; after her trotted a white pomeranian.
Later he encountered her in the municipal park, and in the square,
several times a day. She was always alone, wearing the same toque, and
the pomeranian always trotted at her side. Nobody knew who she was,
and people referred to her simply as “the lady with the dog.”
“If she’s here without her husband, and without any friends,” thought
Gurov, “it wouldn’t be a bad idea to make her acquaintance.”
He was not yet forty, but had a twelve-year-old daughter and two
schoolboy sons. He had been talked into marrying in his second year at
college, and his wife now looked nearly twice as old as he was. She was a
tall, black-browed woman, erect, digniﬁed, imposing, and, as she said of
herself, a “thinker.” She was a great reader, omitted the “hard sign” at the
end of words in her letters, and called her husband “Dimitri” instead of

Dmitri; and though he secretly considered her shallow, narrowminded,
and dowdy, he stood in awe of her, and disliked being at home. It was
long since he had ﬁrst begun deceiving her and he was now constantly
unfaithful to her, and this was no doubt why he spoke slightingly of
women, to whom he referred as the lower race.
He considered that the ample lessons he had received from bitter
experience entitled him to call them whatever he liked, but without this
“lower race” he could not have existed a single day. He was bored and ill-
at-ease in the company of men, with whom he was always cold and
reserved, but felt quite at home among women, and knew exactly what
to say to them, and how to behave; he could even be silent in their com-
pany without feeling the slightest awkwardness. There was an elusive
charm in his appearance and disposition which attracted women and
caught their sympathies. He knew this and was himself attracted to
them by some invisible force.
Repeated and bitter experience had taught him that every fresh inti-
macy, while at ﬁrst introducing such pleasant variety into everyday life,
and offering itself as a charming, light adventure, inevitably developed,
among decent people (especially in Moscow, where they are so irresolute
and slow to move), into a problem of excessive complication leading to
an intolerably irksome situation. But every time he encountered an
attractive woman he forgot all about this experience, the desire for life
surged up in him, and everything suddenly seemed simple and amusing.
One evening, then, while he was dining at the restaurant in the park,
the lady in the toque came strolling up and took a seat at a neighbouring
table. Her expression, gait, dress, coiffure, all told him that she was from
the upper classes, that she was married, that she was in Yalta for the ﬁrst
time, alone and bored. . . . The accounts of the laxity of morals among
visitors to Yalta are greatly exaggerated, and he paid no heed to them,
knowing that for the most part they were invented by people who would
gladly have transgressed themselves, had they known how to set about
it. But when the lady sat down at a neighbouring table a few yards away
from him, these stories of easy conquests, of excursions to the mountains,
came back to him, and the seductive idea of a brisk transitory liaison, an
affair with a woman whose very name he did not know, suddenly took
possession of his mind.
He snapped his ﬁngers at the pomeranian, and when it trotted up to
him, shook his foreﬁnger at it. The pomeranian growled. Gurov shook
his ﬁnger again.
The lady glanced at him and instantly lowered her eyes.
“He doesn’t bite,” she said, and blushed.
“May I give him a bone?” he asked, and on her nod of consent added
in friendly tones: “Have you been long in Yalta?”
The Lady with the Dog

“About ﬁve days.”
“And I am dragging out my second week here.”
Neither spoke for a few minutes.
“The days pass quickly, and yet one is so bored here,” she said, not
looking at him.
“It’s the thing to say it’s boring here. People never complain of bore-
dom in God-forsaken holes like Belyev or Zhizdra, but when they get
here it’s: ‘Oh, the dullness! Oh, the dust!’ You’d think they’d come from
Grenada to say the least of it.”
She laughed. Then they both went on eating in silence, like com-
plete strangers. But after dinner they left the restaurant together, and
embarked upon the light, jesting talk of people free and contented, for
whom it is all the same where they go, or what they talk about. They
strolled along, remarking on the strange light over the sea. The water
was a warm, tender purple, the moonlight lay on its surface in a golden
strip. They said how close it was, after the hot day. Gurov told her he was
from Moscow, that he was really a philologist, but worked in a bank; that
he had at one time trained himself to sing in a private opera company,
but had given up the idea; that he owned two houses in Moscow....A n d
from her he learned that she had grown up in Petersburg, but had got
married in the town of S., where she had been living two years, that she
would stay another month in Yalta, and that perhaps her husband, who
also needed a rest, would join her. She was quite unable to explain
whether her husband was a member of the gubernia council, or on the
board of the Zemstvo, and was greatly amused at herself for this. Fur-
ther, Gurov learned that her name was Anna Sergeyevna.
Back in his own room he thought about her, and felt sure he would
meet her the next day. It was inevitable. As he went to bed he reminded
himself that only a very short time ago she had been a schoolgirl, like his
own daughter, learning her lessons; he remembered how much there
was of shyness and constraint in her laughter, in her way of conversing
with a stranger — it was probably the ﬁrst time in her life that she found
herself alone, and in a situation in which men could follow her and
watch her, and speak to her, all the time with a secret aim she could not
fail to divine. He recalled her slender, delicate neck, her ﬁne grey eyes.
“And yet there’s something pathetic about her,” he thought to himself
as he fell asleep.
II
A week had passed since the beginning of their acquaintance. It was a
holiday. Indoors it was stuffy, but the dust rose in clouds out of doors,
The Lady with the Dog

and people’s hats blew off. It was a thirsty day and Gurov kept going to
the outdoor café for fruit-drinks and ices to offer Anna Sergeyevna. The
heat was overpowering.
In the evening, when the wind had dropped, they walked to the pier to
see the steamer in. There were a great many people strolling about the
landing-place; some, bunches of ﬂowers in their hands, were meeting
friends. Two peculiarities of the smart Yalta crowd stood out distinctly —
the elderly ladies all tried to dress very young, and there seemed to be an
inordinate number of generals about.
Owing to the roughness of the sea the steamer arrived late, after the
sun had gone down, and it had to manoeuvre for some time before it
could get alongside the pier. Anna Sergeyevna scanned the steamer and
passengers through her lorgnette, as if looking for someone she knew,
and when she turned to Gurov her eyes were glistening. She talked a
great deal, ﬁring off abrupt questions and forgetting immediately what it
was she had wanted to know. Then she lost her lorgnette in the crush.
The smart crowd began dispersing, features could no longer be made
out, the wind had quite dropped, and Gurov and Anna Sergeyevna stood
there as if waiting for someone else to come off the steamer. Anna
Sergeyevna had fallen silent, every now and then smelling her ﬂowers,
but not looking at Gurov.
“It’s turning out a ﬁne evening,” he said. “What shall we do? We might
go for a drive.”
She made no reply.
He looked steadily at her and suddenly took her in his arms and kissed
her lips, and the fragrance and dampness of the ﬂowers closed round
him, but the next moment he looked behind him in alarm — had anyone
seen them?
“Let’s go to your room,” he murmured.
And they walked off together, very quickly.
Her room was stuffy and smelt of some scent she had bought in
the Japanese shop. Gurov looked at her, thinking to himself: “How full of
strange encounters life is!” He could remember carefree, good-natured
women who were exhilarated by love-making and grateful to him for the
happiness he gave them, however shortlived; and there had been others—
his wife among them—whose caresses were insincere, affected, hysterical,
mixed up with a great deal of quite unnecessary talk, and whose expres-
sion seemed to say that all this was not just love-making or passion, but
something much more signiﬁcant; then there had been two or three
beautiful, cold women, over whose features ﬂitted a predatory expres-
sion, betraying a determination to wring from life more than it could
give, women no longer in their ﬁrst youth, capricious, irrational, despotic,
brainless, and when Gurov had cooled to these, their beauty aroused in
The Lady with the Dog

him nothing but repulsion, and the lace trimming on their underclothes
reminded him of ﬁsh-scales.
But here the timidity and awkwardness of youth and inexperience
were still apparent; and there was a feeling of embarrassment in the
atmosphere, as if someone had just knocked at the door. Anna Ser-
geyevna, “the lady with the dog,” seemed to regard the affair as some-
thing very special, very serious, as if she had become a fallen woman, an
attitude he found odd and disconcerting. Her features lengthened and
drooped, and her long hair hung mournfully on either side of her face.
She assumed a pose of dismal meditation, like a repentant sinner in
some classical painting.
“It isn’t right,” she said. “You will never respect me any more.”
On the table was a water-melon. Gurov cut himself a slice from it and
began slowly eating it. At least half an hour passed in silence.
Anna Sergeyevna was very touching, revealing the purity of a decent,
naive woman who had seen very little of life. The solitary candle burning
on the table scarcely lit up her face, but it was obvious that her heart was
heavy.
“Why should I stop respecting you?” asked Gurov. “You don’t know
what you’re saying.”
“May God forgive me!” she exclaimed, and her eyes ﬁlled with tears.
“It’s terrible.”
“No need to seek to justify yourself.”
“How can I justify myself? I’m a wicked, fallen woman, I despise
myself and have not the least thought of self-justiﬁcation. It isn’t my hus-
band I have deceived, it’s myself. And not only now, I have been deceiv-
ing myself for ever so long. My husband is no doubt an honest, worthy
man, but he’s a ﬂunkey. I don’t know what it is he does at his ofﬁce, but I
know he’s a ﬂunkey. I was only twenty when I married him, and I was
devoured by curiosity, I wanted something higher. I told myself that
there must be a different kind of life. I wanted to live, to live. . . . I was
burning with curiosity . . . you’ll never understand that, but I swear to
God I could no longer control myself, nothing could hold me back, I told
my husband I was ill, and I came here. . . . And I started going about like
one possessed, like a madwoman . . . and now I have become an ordi-
nary, worthless woman, and everyone has the right to despise me.”
Gurov listened to her, bored to death. The naive accents, the remorse,
all was so unexpected, so out of place. But for the tears in her eyes, she
might have been jesting or play-acting.
“I don’t understand,” he said gently. “What is it you want?”
She hid her face against his breast and pressed closer to him.
“Do believe me, I implore you to believe me,” she said. “I love all that
is honest and pure in life, vice is revolting to me. I don’t know what I’m
The Lady with the Dog

doing. The common people say they are snared by the devil. And now I
can say that I have been snared by the devil, too.”
“Come, come,” he murmured.
He gazed into her ﬁxed, terriﬁed eyes, kissed her, and soothed her with
gentle affectionate words, and gradually she calmed down and regained
her cheerfulness. Soon they were laughing together again.
When, a little later, they went out, there was not a soul on the prome-
nade, the town and its cypresses looked dead, but the sea was still roar-
ing as it dashed against the beach. A solitary ﬁshing-boat tossed on the
waves, its lamp blinking sleepily.
They found a droshky and drove to Oreanda.
“I discovered your name in the hall, just now,” said Gurov, “written up
on the board. Von Diederitz. Is your husband a German?”
“No. His grandfather was, I think, but he belongs to the Orthodox
church himself.”
When they got out of the droshky at Oreanda they sat down on a
bench not far from the church, and looked down at the sea, without talk-
ing. Yalta could be dimly discerned through the morning mist, and white
clouds rested motionless on the summits of the mountains. Not a leaf
stirred, the grasshoppers chirruped, and the monotonous hollow roar of
the sea came up to them, speaking of peace, of the eternal sleep lying in
wait for us all. The sea had roared like this long before there was any
Yalta or Oreanda, it was roaring now, and it would go on roaring, just as
indifferently and hollowly, when we had passed away. And it may be that
in this continuity, this utter indifference to life and death, lies the secret
of our ultimate salvation, of the stream of life on our planet, and of its
never-ceasing movement towards perfection.
Side by side with a young woman, who looked so exquisite in the early
light, soothed and enchanted by the sight of all this magical beauty —
sea, mountains, clouds and the vast expanse of the sky — Gurov told
himself that, when you came to think of it, everything in the world
is beautiful really, everything but our own thoughts and actions, when
we lose sight of the higher aims of life, and of our dignity as human
beings.
Someone approached them — a watchman, probably — looked at
them and went away. And there was something mysterious and beautiful
even in this. The steamer from Feodosia could be seen coming towards
the pier, lit up by the dawn, its lamps out.
“There’s dew on the grass,” said Anna Sergeyevna, breaking the silence.
“Yes. Time to go home.”
They went back to the town.
After this they met every day at noon on the promenade, lunching and
dining together, going for walks, and admiring the sea. She complained
The Lady with the Dog

of sleeplessness, of palpitations, asked the same questions over and over
again, alternately surrendering to jealousy and the fear that he did not
really respect her. And often, when there was nobody in sight in the
square or the park, he would draw her to him and kiss her passionately.
The utter idleness, these kisses in broad daylight, accompanied by
furtive glances and the fear of discovery, the heat, the smell of the sea,
and the idle, smart, well-fed people continually crossing their ﬁeld of
vision, seemed to have given him a new lease on life. He told Anna Ser-
geyevna she was beautiful and seductive, made love to her with impetu-
ous passion, and never left her side, while she was always pensive,
always trying to force from him the admission that he did not respect
her, that he did not love her a bit, and considered her just an ordinary
woman. Almost every night they drove out of town, to Oreanda, the
waterfall, or some other beauty-spot. And these excursions were in-
variably a success, each contributing fresh impressions of majestic beauty.
All this time they kept expecting her husband to arrive. But a letter
came in which he told his wife that he was having trouble with his eyes,
and implored her to come home as soon as possible. Anna Sergeyevna
made hasty preparations for leaving.
“It’s a good thing I’m going,” she said to Gurov. “It’s the intervention of
fate.”
She left Yalta in a carriage, and he went with her as far as the railway
station. The drive took nearly a whole day. When she got into the express
train, after the second bell had been rung, she said:
“Let me have one more look at you. . . . One last look. That’s right.”
She did not weep, but was mournful, and seemed ill, the muscles of
her cheeks twitching.
“I shall think of you . . . I shall think of you all the time,” she said.
“God bless you! Think kindly of me. We are parting for ever, it must be so,
because we ought never to have met. Good-bye — God bless you.”
The train steamed rapidly out of the station, its lights soon disappear-
ing, and a minute later even the sound it made was silenced, as if every-
thing were conspiring to bring this sweet oblivion, this madness, to an
end as quickly as possible. And Gurov, standing alone on the platform
and gazing into the dark distance, listened to the shrilling of the
grasshoppers and the humming of the telegraph wires, with a feeling
that he had only just waked up. And he told himself that this had been
just one more of the many adventures in his life, and that it, too, was
over, leaving nothing but a memory....  H e  w a s  m oved and sad, and felt
a slight remorse. After all, this young woman whom he would never
again see had not been really happy with him. He had been friendly and
affectionate with her, but in his whole behaviour, in the tones of his
voice, in his very caresses, there had been a shade of irony, the insulting
The Lady with the Dog

indulgence of the fortunate male, who was, moreover, almost twice her
age. She had insisted in calling him good, remarkable, high-minded. Evi-
dently he had appeared to her different from his real self, in a word he
had involuntarily deceived her....
There was an autumnal feeling in the air, and the evening was chilly.
“It’s time for me to be going north, too,” thought Gurov, as he walked
away from the platform. “High time!”
III
When he got back to Moscow it was beginning to look like winter, the
stoves were heated every day, and it was still dark when the children got
up to go to school and drank their tea, so that the nurse had to light the
lamp for a short time. Frost had set in. When the ﬁrst snow falls, and one
goes for one’s ﬁrst sleigh-ride, it is pleasant to see the white ground, the
white roofs; one breathes freely and lightly, and remembers the days of
one’s youth. The ancient lime-trees and birches, white with rime, have a
good-natured look, they are closer to the heart than cypresses and
palms, and beneath their branches one is no longer haunted by the
memory of mountains and the sea.
Gurov had always lived in Moscow, and he returned to Moscow on a
ﬁne frosty day, and when he put on his fur-lined overcoat and thick
gloves, and sauntered down Petrovka Street, and when, on Saturday
evening, he heard the church bells ringing, his recent journey and the
places he had visited lost their charm for him. He became gradually
immersed in Moscow life, reading with avidity three newspapers a day,
while declaring he never read Moscow newspapers on principle. Once
more he was caught up in a whirl of restaurants, clubs, banquets, and
celebrations, once more glowed with the ﬂattering consciousness that
well-known lawyers and actors came to his house, that he played cards
in the Medical Club opposite a professor.
He had believed that in a month’s time Anna Sergeyevna would be
nothing but a wistful memory, and that hereafter, with her wistful smile,
she would only occasionally appear to him in dreams, like others before
her. But the month was now well over and winter was in full swing, and
all was as clear in his memory as if he had only parted with Anna
Sergeyevna the day before. And his recollections grew ever more insis-
tent. When the voices of his children at their lessons reached him in his
study through the evening stillness, when he heard a song, or the sounds
of a musical-box in a restaurant, when the wind howled in the chimney,
it all came back to him: early morning on the pier, the misty mountains,
The Lady with the Dog

the steamer from Feodosia, the kisses. He would pace up and down his
room for a long time, smiling at his memories, and then memory turned
into dreaming, and what had happened mingled in his imagination with
what was going to happen. Anna Sergeyevna did not come to him in his
dreams, she accompanied him everywhere, like his shadow, following
him everywhere he went. When he closed his eyes, she seemed to stand
before him in the ﬂesh, still lovelier, younger, tenderer than she had really
been, and looking back, he saw himself, too, as better than he had been
in Yalta. In the evenings she looked out at him from the bookshelves, the
ﬁre-place, the corner, he could hear her breathing, the sweet rustle of her
skirts. In the streets he followed women with his eyes, to see if there
were any like her....  
He began to feel an overwhelming desire to share his memories with
someone. But he could not speak of his love at home, and outside his
home who was there for him to conﬁde in? Not the tenants living in his
house, and certainly not his colleagues at the bank. And what was there
to tell? Was it love that he had felt? Had there been anything exquisite,
poetic, anything instructive or even amusing about his relations with
Anna Sergeyevna? He had to content himself with uttering vague gener-
alizations about love and women, and nobody guessed what he meant,
though his wife’s dark eyebrows twitched as she said:
“The role of a coxcomb doesn’t suit you a bit, Dimitri.”
One evening, leaving the Medical Club with one of his card-partners, a
government ofﬁcial, he could not refrain from remarking:
“If you only knew what a charming woman I met in Yalta!”
The ofﬁcial got into his sleigh, and just before driving off turned and
called out:
“Dmitri Dmitrich!”
“Yes?”
“You were quite right, you know — the sturgeon was just a leetle off.”
These words, in themselves so commonplace, for some reason infuri-
ated Gurov, seemed to him humiliating, gross. What savage manners,
what people! What wasted evenings, what tedious, empty days! Frantic
card-playing, gluttony, drunkenness, perpetual talk always about the
same thing. The greater part of one’s time and energy went on business
that was no use to anyone, and on discussing the same thing over and
over again, and there was nothing to show for it all but a stunted, earth-
bound existence and a round of trivialities, and there was nowhere to
escape to, you might as well be in a mad-house or a convict settlement.
Gurov lay awake all night, raging, and went about the whole of the
next day with a headache. He slept badly on the succeeding nights, too,
sitting up in bed, thinking, or pacing the ﬂoor of his room. He was sick
The Lady with the Dog

of his children, sick of the bank, felt not the slightest desire to go any-
where or talk about anything.
When the Christmas holidays came, he packed his things, telling his
wife he had to go to Petersburg in the interests of a certain young man,
and set off for the town of S. To what end? He hardly knew himself. He
only knew that he must see Anna Sergeyevna, must speak to her, arrange
a meeting, if possible.
He arrived at S. in the morning and engaged the best room in the
hotel, which had a carpet of grey military frieze, and a dusty ink-pot on
the table, surmounted by a headless rider, holding his hat in his raised
hand. The hall porter told him what he wanted to know: von Diederitz
had a house of his own in Staro-Goncharnaya Street. It wasn’t far from
the hotel, he lived on a grand scale, luxuriously, kept carriage-horses,
the whole town knew him. The hall porter pronounced the name
“Drideritz.”
Gurov strolled over to Staro-Goncharnaya Street and discovered the
house. In front of it was a long grey fence with inverted nails hammered
into the tops of the palings.
“A fence like that is enough to make anyone want to run away,”
thought Gurov, looking at the windows of the house and the fence.
He reasoned that since it was a holiday, her husband would probably
be at home. In any case it would be tactless to embarrass her by calling
at the house. And a note might fall into the hands of the husband, and
bring about catastrophe. The best thing would be to wait about on
the chance of seeing her. And he walked up and down the street, hover-
ing in the vicinity of the fence, watching for his chance. A beggar entered
the gate, only to be attacked by dogs, then, an hour later, the faint, vague
sounds of a piano reached his ears. That would be Anna Sergeyevna
playing. Suddenly the front door opened and an old woman came out,
followed by a familiar white pomeranian. Gurov tried to call to it, but
his heart beat violently, and in his agitation he could not remember its
name.
He walked on, hating the grey fence more and more, and now ready to
tell himself irately that Anna Sergeyevna had forgotten him, had already,
perhaps, found distraction in another — what could be more natural in a
young woman who had to look at this accursed fence from morning to
night? He went back to his hotel and sat on the sofa in his room for some
time, not knowing what to do, then he ordered dinner, and after dinner,
had a long sleep.
“What a foolish, restless business,” he thought, waking up and looking
towards the dark window-panes. It was evening by now. “Well, I’ve had
my sleep out. And what am I to do in the night?”
The Lady with the Dog

He sat up in bed, covered by the cheap grey quilt, which reminded
him of a hospital blanket, and in his vexation he fell to taunting himself.
“You and your lady with a dog . . . there’s adventure for you! See what
you get for your pains.”
On his arrival at the station that morning he had noticed a poster
announcing in enormous letters the ﬁrst performance at the local theatre
of The Geisha. Remembering this, he got up and made for the theatre.
“It’s highly probable that she goes to ﬁrst-nights,” he told himself.
The theatre was full. It was a typical provincial theatre, with a mist
collecting over the chandeliers, and the crowd in the gallery ﬁdgeting
noisily. In the ﬁrst row of the stalls the local dandies stood waiting for
the curtain to go up, their hands clasped behind them. There, in the
front seat of the Governor’s box, sat the Governor’s daughter, wearing a
boa, the Governor himself hiding modestly behind the drapes, so that
only his hands were visible. The curtain stirred, the orchestra took a
long time tuning up their instruments. Gurov’s eyes roamed eagerly over
the audience as they ﬁled in and occupied their seats.
Anna Sergeyevna came in, too. She seated herself in the third row of
the stalls, and when Gurov’s glance fell on her, his heart seemed to stop,
and he knew in a ﬂash that the whole world contained no one nearer
or dearer to him, no one more important to his happiness. This little
woman, lost in the provincial crowd, in no way remarkable, holding a
silly lorgnette in her hand, now ﬁlled his whole life, was his grief, his joy,
all that he desired. Lulled by the sounds coming from the wretched
orchestra, with its feeble, amateurish violinists, he thought how beauti-
ful she was . . . thought and dreamed. . . . 
Anna Sergeyevna was accompanied by a tall, round-shouldered young
man with small whiskers, who nodded at every step before taking the
seat beside her and seemed to be continually bowing to someone. This
must be her husband, whom, in a ﬁt of bitterness, at Yalta, she had
called a “ﬂunkey.” And there really was something of the lackey’s servility
in his lanky ﬁgure, his side-whiskers, and the little bald spot on the top
of his head. And he smiled sweetly, and the badge of some scientiﬁc
society gleaming in his buttonhole was like the number on a footman’s
livery.
The husband went out to smoke in the ﬁrst interval, and she was left
alone in her seat. Gurov, who had taken a seat in the stalls, went up to
her and said in a trembling voice, with a forced smile: “How d’you do?”
She glanced up at him and turned pale, then looked at him again in
alarm, unable to believe her eyes, squeezing her fan and lorgnette in one
hand, evidently struggling to overcome a feeling of faintness. Neither of
them said a word. She sat there, and he stood beside her, disconcerted
The Lady with the Dog

by her embarrassment, and not daring to sit down. The violins and ﬂutes
sang out as they were tuned, and there was a tense sensation in the
atmosphere, as if they were being watched from all the boxes. At last she
got up and moved rapidly towards one of the exits. He followed her and
they wandered aimlessly along corridors, up and down stairs; ﬁgures
ﬂashed by in the uniforms of legal ofﬁcials, high-school teachers and
civil servants, all wearing badges; ladies, coats hanging from pegs ﬂashed
by; there was a sharp draught, bringing with it an odour of cigarette-
stubs. And Gurov, whose heart was beating violently, thought:
“What on earth are all these people, this orchestra for? . . .”
The next minute he suddenly remembered how, after seeing Anna
Sergeyevna off that evening at the station, he had told himself that all
was over, and they would never meet again. And how far away the end
seemed to be now!
She stopped on a dark narrow staircase over which was a notice bear-
ing the inscription “To the upper circle.”
“How you frightened me!” she said, breathing heavily, still pale and
half-stunned. “Oh, how you frightened me! I’m almost dead! Why did
you come? Oh, why?”
“But, Anna,” he said, in low, hasty tones. “But, Anna. . . . Try to under-
stand . . . do try.... ”
She cast him a glance of fear, entreaty, love, and then gazed at him
steadily, as if to ﬁx his features ﬁrmly in her memory.
“I’ve been so unhappy,” she continued, taking no notice of his words.
“I could think of nothing but you the whole time, I lived on the thoughts
of you. I tried to forget — why, oh, why did you come?”
On the landing above them were two schoolboys, smoking and look-
ing down, but Gurov did not care, and, drawing Anna Sergeyevna
towards him, began kissing her face, her lips, her hands.
“What are you doing, oh, what are you doing?” she said in horror,
drawing back. “We have both gone mad. Go away this very night, this mo-
ment. . . . By all that is sacred, I implore you. . . . Somebody is coming.”
Someone was ascending the stairs.
“You must go away,” went on Anna Sergeyevna in a whisper. “D’you
hear me, Dmitri Dmitrich? I’ll come to you in Moscow. I have never been
happy, I am unhappy now, and I shall never be happy — never! Do not
make me suffer still more! I will come to you in Moscow, I swear it! And
now we must part! My dear one, my kind one, my darling, we must
part.”
She pressed his hand and hurried down the stairs, looking back at
him continually, and her eyes showed that she was in truth unhappy.
Gurov stood where he was for a short time, listening, and when all was
quiet went to look for his coat, and left the theatre.
The Lady with the Dog

IV
And Anna Sergeyevna began going to Moscow to see him. Every two
or three months she left the town of S., telling her husband that she was
going to consult a specialist on female diseases, and her husband
believed her and did not believe her. In Moscow she always stayed at the
“Slavyanski Bazaar,” sending a man in a red cap to Gurov the moment
she arrived. Gurov went to her, and no one in Moscow knew anything
about it.
One winter morning he went to see her as usual (the messenger had
been to him the evening before, but had not found him at home). His
daughter was with him for her school was on the way, and he thought he
might as well see her to it.
“It is three degrees above zero,” said Gurov to his daughter, “and yet it
is snowing. You see it is only above zero close to the ground, the temper-
ature in the upper layers of the atmosphere is quite different.”
“Why doesn’t it ever thunder in winter, Papa?”
He explained this, too. As he was speaking, he kept reminding himself
that he was going to a rendezvous and that not a living soul knew about
it, or, probably, ever would. He led a double life — one in public, in the
sight of all whom it concerned, full of conventional truth and conven-
tional deception, exactly like the lives of his friends and acquaintances,
and another which ﬂowed in secret. And, owing to some strange, pos-
sibly quite accidental chain of circumstances, everything that was im-
portant, interesting, essential, everything about which he was sincere and
never deceived himself, everything that composed the kernel of his life,
went on in secret, while everything that was false in him, everything that
composed the husk in which he hid himself and the truth which was in
him — his work at the bank, discussions at the club, his “lower race,” his
attendance at anniversary celebrations with his wife — was on the sur-
face. He began to judge others by himself, no longer believing what he
saw, and always assuming that the real, the only interesting life of every
individual goes on as under cover of night, secretly. Every individual
existence revolves around mystery, and perhaps that is the chief reason
that all cultivated individuals insisted so strongly on the respect due to
personal secrets.
After leaving his daughter at the door of her school Gurov set off for
the “Slavyanski Bazaar.” Taking off his overcoat in the lobby, he went up-
stairs and knocked softly on the door. Anna Sergeyevna, wearing the grey
dress he liked most, exhausted by her journey and by suspense, had been
expecting him since the evening before. She was pale and looked at him
without smiling, but was in his arms almost before he was fairly in the
room. Their kiss was lingering, prolonged, as if they had not met for years.
The Lady with the Dog

“Well, how are you?” he asked. “Anything new?”
“Wait, I’ll tell you in a minute. . . . I can’t. . . .”
She could not speak, because she was crying. Turning away, she held
her handkerchief to her eyes.
“I’ll wait till she’s had her cry out,” he thought, and sank into a chair.
He rang for tea, and a little later, while he was drinking it, she was still
standing there, her face to the window. She wept from emotion, from
her bitter consciousness of the sadness of their life; they could only see
one another in secret, hiding from people, as if they were thieves. Was
not their life a broken one?
“Don’t cry,” he said.
It was quite obvious to him that this love of theirs would not soon
come to an end, and that no one could say when this end would be. Anna
Sergeyevna loved him ever more fondly, worshipped him, and there
would have been no point in telling her that one day it must end. Indeed,
she would not have believed him.
He moved over and took her by the shoulders, intending to fondle her
with light words, but suddenly he caught sight of himself in the looking-
glass.
His hair was already beginning to turn grey. It struck him as strange
that he should have aged so much in the last few years. The shoulders on
which his hands lay were warm and quivering. He felt a pity for this life,
still so warm and exquisite, but probably soon to fade and droop like his
own. Why did she love him so? Women had always believed him differ-
ent from what he really was, had loved in him not himself but the man
their imagination pictured him, a man they had sought for eagerly all
their lives. And afterwards when they discovered their mistake, they
went on loving him just the same. And not one of them had ever been
happy with him. Time had passed, he had met one woman after another,
become intimate with each, parted with each, but had never loved.
There had been all sorts of things between them, but never love.
And only now, when he was grey-haired, had he fallen in love properly,
thoroughly, for the ﬁrst time in his life.
He and Anna Sergeyevna loved one another as people who are very
close and intimate, as husband and wife, as dear friends love one
another. It seemed to them that fate had intended them for one another,
and they could not understand why she should have a husband, and he a
wife. They were like two migrating birds, the male and the female, who
had been caught and put into separate cages. They forgave one another
all that they were ashamed of in the past, in their present, and felt that
this love of theirs had changed them both.
Formerly, in moments of melancholy, he had consoled himself by the
The Lady with the Dog

ﬁrst argument that came into his head, but now arguments were nothing
to him, he felt profound pity, desired to be sincere, tender.
“Stop crying, my dearest,” he said. “You’ve had your cry, now stop. . . .
Now let us have a talk, let us try and think what we are to do.”
Then they discussed their situation for a long time, trying to think
how they could get rid of the necessity for hiding, deception, living in
different towns, being so long without meeting. How were they to shake
off these intolerable fetters?
“How? How?” he repeated, clutching his head. “How?”
And it seemed to them that they were within an inch of arriving at a
decision, and that then a new, beautiful life would begin. And they both
realized that the end was still far, far away, and that the hardest, the
most complicated part was only just beginning.
[1899]